THE PATENTS ACT, 1970
(Act No. 39 of 1970, as amended by Patents (Amendment) Act, 2005)

An Act to amend and consolidate the law relating to patents.

CHAPTER I - PRELIMINARY

Section 1. Short title, extent and commencement.
(1) This Act may be called the Patents Act, 1970.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

Section 2. Definitions and interpretation.
(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(j) "invention" means a new product or process involving an inventive step and capable of industrial application;
(ja) "inventive step" means a feature of an invention that involves technical advance as compared to the existing knowledge or having economic significance or both and that makes the invention not obvious to a person skilled in the art;
(l) "new invention" means any invention or technology which has not been anticipated by publication in any document or used in the country or elsewhere in the world before the date of filing of patent application with complete specification, that is to say, the subject-matter has not fallen in public domain or that it does not form part of the state of the art;
(m) "patent" means a patent for any invention granted under this Act;
(ta) "pharmaceutical substance" means any new entity involving one or more inventive steps;
(y) "true and first inventor" does not include either the first importer of an invention into India, or a person to whom an invention is first communicated from outside India.

CHAPTER II - INVENTIONS NOT PATENTABLE

Section 3 of the Patents Act, 1970: What are not inventions.
The following are not inventions within the meaning of the Patents Act, 1970:

Section 3(a) of the Patents Act, 1970: An invention which is frivolous or which claims anything obviously contrary to well established natural laws.

Section 3(b) of the Patents Act, 1970: An invention the primary or intended use or commercial exploitation of which could be contrary to public order or morality or which causes serious prejudice to human, animal or plant life or health or to the environment.

Section 3(c) of the Patents Act, 1970: The mere discovery of a scientific principle or the formulation of an abstract theory or discovery of any living thing or non-living substance occurring in nature.

Section 3(d) of the Patents Act, 1970: The mere discovery of a new form of a known substance which does not result in the enhancement of the known efficacy of that substance or the mere discovery of any new property or new use for a known substance or of the mere use of a known process, machine or apparatus unless such known process results in a new product or employs at least one new reactant. Explanation to Section 3(d): For the purposes of this clause, salts, esters, ethers, polymorphs, metabolites, pure form, particle size, isomers, mixtures of isomers, complexes, combinations and other derivatives of known substance shall be considered to be the same substance, unless they differ significantly in properties with regard to efficacy (efficacy in the case of pharmaceutical and medicinal substances means therapeutic efficacy as affirmed by the Supreme Court of India in Novartis AG v. Union of India).

Section 3(e) of the Patents Act, 1970: A substance obtained by a mere admixture resulting only in the aggregation of the properties of the components thereof or a process for producing such substance.

Section 3(f) of the Patents Act, 1970: The mere arrangement or re-arrangement or duplication of known devices each functioning independently of one another in a known way.

Section 3(h) of the Patents Act, 1970: A method of agriculture or horticulture.

Section 3(i) of the Patents Act, 1970: Any process for the medicinal, surgical, curative, prophylactic, diagnostic, therapeutic or other treatment of human beings or any process for a similar treatment of animals to render them free of disease or to increase their economic value or that of their products.

Section 3(j) of the Patents Act, 1970: Plants and animals in whole or any part thereof other than micro-organisms but including seeds, varieties and species and essentially biological processes for production or propagation of plants and animals.

Section 3(k) of the Patents Act, 1970: A mathematical or business method or a computer programme per se or algorithms.

Section 3(l) of the Patents Act, 1970: A literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work or any other aesthetic creation whatsoever including cinematographic works and television productions.

Section 3(m) of the Patents Act, 1970: A mere scheme or rule or method of performing mental act or method of playing game.

Section 3(n) of the Patents Act, 1970: A presentation of information.

Section 3(o) of the Patents Act, 1970: Topography of integrated circuits.

Section 3(p) of the Patents Act, 1970: An invention which in effect, is traditional knowledge or which is an aggregation or duplication of known properties of traditionally known component or components, including Ayurvedic formulations, Siddha, Unani, and traditional knowledge documented in the Traditional Knowledge Digital Library (TKDL).


Section 4. Inventions relating to atomic energy not patentable.
No patent shall be granted in respect of an invention relating to atomic energy falling within sub-section (1) of section 20 of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 (33 of 1962).

CHAPTER III - APPLICATIONS FOR PATENTS

Section 6. Persons entitled to apply for patents.
(1) Subject to the provisions contained in section 134, an application for a patent for an invention may be made by any of the following persons:
(a) by any person claiming to be the true and first inventor of the invention;
(b) by any person being the assignee of the person claiming to be the true and first inventor in respect of the right to make such an application;
(c) by the legal representative of any deceased person who immediately before his death was entitled to make such an application.

Section 10 of the Patents Act, 1970: Contents of specifications.
(1) Every specification, whether provisional or complete, shall describe the invention.
(4) Every complete specification shall:
(a) fully and particularly describe the invention and its operation or use and the method by which it is to be performed;
(b) disclose the best method of performing the invention which is known to the applicant and for which he is entitled to claim protection;
(c) end with a claim or claims defining the scope of the invention for which protection is claimed;
(d) be accompanied by an abstract to provide technical information on the invention.
Provided that if the applicant mentions a biological material in the specification which may not be described in such a way as to satisfy clauses (a) and (b), the applicant shall deposit the material with an international depository authority, and under Section 10(4)(d)(ii)(D) disclose the source and geographical origin of the biological material in the specification, when used in an invention.

CHAPTER V - OPPOSITION TO GRANT OF PATENT

Section 25 of the Patents Act, 1970: Opposition to the patent.
(1) Where an application for a patent has been published but a patent has not been granted, any person may, in writing, represent by way of pre-grant opposition to the Controller against the grant of patent on the ground:
(d) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification was publicly known or publicly used in India before the priority date of that claim;
(e) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification is obvious and clearly does not involve any inventive step;
(f) that the subject of any claim of the complete specification is not an invention within the meaning of this Act, or is not patentable under this Act (including Section 3(d), 3(e), and 3(p));
(j) that the complete specification does not disclose or wrongly mentions the source or geographical origin of biological material used for the invention;
(k) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification was anticipated having regard to the knowledge, oral or otherwise, available within any local or indigenous community in India or elsewhere (Traditional Knowledge / TKDL prior art).

CHAPTER VIII - GRANT OF PATENTS AND RIGHTS CONFERRED

Section 48 of the Patents Act, 1970: Rights of patentees.
Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act and the conditions specified in section 47, a patent granted under this Act shall confer upon the patentee:
(a) where the subject-matter of the patent is a product, the exclusive right to prevent third parties, who do not have his consent, from the act of making, using, offering for sale, selling or importing for those purposes that product in India;
(b) where the subject-matter of the patent is a process, the exclusive right to prevent third parties, who do not have his consent, from the act of using that process, and from the act of using, offering for sale, selling or importing for those purposes the product obtained directly by that process in India.

Section 53 of the Patents Act, 1970: Term of patent.
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the term of every patent granted, after the commencement of the Patents (Amendment) Act, 2002, and the term of every patent which has not expired and has not ceased to have effect, on the date of such commencement, under this Act, shall be twenty years from the date of filing of the application for the patent.

